The focus of this video is the greatest common denominator, which is sometimes called the greatest common
factor.
I'm going to continue calling this thing the greatest common denominator because that helps link it
to Python a little bit better.
So what is the greatest common denominator?
It is defined as the largest integer that divides into two numbers -- two other integers -- with no remainder.
So here are a few examples.
People often write the greatest common denominator with this kind of syntax, so greatest common denominator
of 2 and 4 is the largest integer that goes into both of these numbers cleanly.
So of course one divides into both of these numbers but we can do better than that.
We can do 2: 2 goes into 2 with no remainder and 2 goes into 4 2 times with no remainder.
So therefore the greatest common denominator of 2 and 4 is 2.
Here's another example.
6 and 15.
Now 2 goes into 6.
But 2 does not go into 15 with 0 remainder; 2 goes into 15 7 times,
that would give you 14 and a remainder of 1. But three actually does go into both these numbers.
Likewise, you know
4 doesn't go into either 5 goes into 15 with no remainder, but 5 doesn't go into 6 with no remainder.
And so on.
Now sometimes you get a pair of numbers like this 6 and 17 where there is no real common denominator.
And in that case we're basically left with the number one, which is kind of like a trivial common denominator
because one goes into everything.
So in a moment I will switch to Python and show you how to implement the greatest common denominator.
But before that I want to show you one application of greatest common denominator, which is reducing
fractions.
So here the idea is that if the greatest common denominator between A and B is C where A B and C are
just standing for real valued integers, then A divided by B can be reduced,
this fraction can be reduced, to its simplest form by dividing both the numerator and the denominator
by C. And that looks something like this in the final step.
So A divided by C over B divided by C so have some double fractions, or embedded fractions, going on
here.
Now the reason why this is valid is there is an intermediate step here, which is to multiply by C divided
by C which is actually just one of course unless C is zero.
But we don't accept a common denominator of zero; it has to be at least 1.
So C divided by C is 1 so that's not really changing anything.
And then you put the A in here and the B over here.
So this is like the kind of abstract theory using symbolic variables.
Here you see an example.
The greatest common denominator between 6 and 15 is 3.
So therefore to reduce 6 divided by 15 into its simplest form you divide both the numerator and the
denominator by 3.
That gives you 6 divided by 3 over 15 divided by 3, which is two thirds. To implement the greatest common
denominator
we are going to use the math module. So far you've seen the numpy module, you've seen sympy module,
and now I'm going to show you the math module. Now previously when I've shown you how to import modules
in the python it was the syntax is something like this so import something as something.
So for example it was import numpy as np, so that's useful if you want to use a shortcut but if you
don't want to use a shortcut then you can just leave it like this.
So we could write for example import math as math and then here I would type math dot you know whatever
the function is, but if I'm going to leave it as math anyway and I'm not shortening it. Then you can just
leave it with this syntax here.
So import space the math module.
So computing the greatest common denominator in the math module is actually pretty simple.
The function is called G C D for greatest common denominator, and you input the two numbers.
So for example, we saw this in the slide -- 6 and 15 -- and now you know you can try a bunch of other numbers.
Pretty interesting. How about ninety five and 100, so the greatest common denominator between these two
numbers is 5.
Now I'd like to show you that the greatest common denominator is defined only for integers so let's
say four and sixteen.
We know here the number is going to be four.
But how about if it's sixteen point one.
Whoops!
Now we get an error, and the error says that a float object.
So a floating point number cannot be interpreted as an integer.
And basically this is Python error.
speak for
I expected an integer and you gave me a floating point number.
So let's get rid of this error by doing something correct here.
All right.
So now I want to show you one of the applications of the greatest common denominator.
So let's say we want to compute the fraction A divided by B and let's set A to be sixteen and B to be
88.
Now if you like you can take a moment and try to figure out in your head what is the greatest common
denominator between these two numbers 16 and 88.
I'm actually feeling a little bit lazy so I'm going to do this using Python and the math module.
So the greatest common factor, which here I'm calling variable fact is going to be math dot G C D A comma
B and let's see what that is.
Out of curiosity.
Okay so it's eight and actually that one isn't too hard to figure out on your own because eight goes
into sixteen twice.
And it goes into 88
eleven times.
Okay.
So now I want to print this out in a slightly nicer looking fashion, and so to do that I'm going to say
from IPython dot display import display and math and you know by now, by this point in the course, that
these are two of my favorite functions for doing fancy printing, nice pretty printing in Python.
So what I'd like to show down here is that 16 divided by eight reduces to two divided by 11 times eight
times eight, and eight times eight is this greatest common factor.
Now it's not really feasible for me just to say print A divided by B because that's actually evaluating
this fraction out to 15 or whatever decimal points.
So instead I'm going to use latex to print this out.
So let's say display and then math and now we want a fraction.
So you remember that to create a fraction using latex code in Python, you say frac and then one curly
bracket for the numerator and another curly bracket for the denominator.
So this is going to be, let's say all right this is A and B and then equals and then we need another
fraction.
This is going to be A divided by C, where I'm just I'm going to replace these letters of course, but C
is going to be the greatest common multiple.
So A divided by C and then in the denominator is B divided by C and then times actually no I think it
might look nicer if I do it like this. I'm going to say instead of A divided by C I'm going to say A
times C and B times C.
Okay so now that I've written out the kind of big structure of what I want this output to look like,
now we go back and replace each of these individual elements.
So these are all going to be replaced with numbers.
So it's percent G in every case.
Percent G and then percent G here again percent G here.
You guessed it... percent G.
Okay.
So we need one two three four five six variables to go in here.
So that's going to be A comma B and then it's A comma fact because this A is for the numerator here
A times the greatest common factor here.
And then we have B fact B comma A fact.
All right.
Let's see what this looks like.
So we see that sixteen equals out.
Right.
This isn't exactly what I want.
In fact this is mathematically incorrect.
I hope you caught this before I did.
This should actually be A divided by fact and then B divided by fact.
All right.
This is looking better.
So two times eight is sixteen, and eleven times eight is eighty eight, and two divided by eleven is the
most reduced form of sixteen divided by eighty eight.
And of course eight over eight will cancel out to one. In this video I showed you the greatest common
denominator.
I explained how it works how to implement it in Python.
And I showed you an application of the greatest common denominator for reducing fractions.
Now I'm sure that you were very upset and disappointed to see that there were no exercises in this video :(
But don't worry! There are two exercises about the greatest common denominator that are coming up!
So stay tuned and watch the next video and prepare to show off your python mathematical skills.